Thutmose I (sometimes read as Thutmosis or Tuthmosis I, Thothmes in older history works in Latinized Greek; Ancient Egyptian: ḏḥwtj-ms Djehutymes, meaning "Thoth is born") was the third pharaoh of the 18th Dynasty of Egypt. Thutmose I received the throne after the death of the previous king, Amenhotep I. During Thutmose I’s reign, Thutmose I campaigned deep into the Levant and Nubia, pushing the borders of Egypt farther than ever before in each region. Thutmose I also built many temples in Egypt, and a tomb for himself in the Valley of the Kings; Thutmose I is the first king confirmed to have done this (though Amenhotep I may have preceded him).
Thutmose I's reign is generally dated to 1506–1493 BC, but a minority of scholars—who think that astrological observations used to calculate the timeline of ancient Egyptian records, and thus the reign of Thutmose I, were taken from the city of Memphis rather than from Thebes—would date Thutmose I’s reign to 1526–1513 BC.[2][3] Thutmose I was succeeded by Thutmose I’s son Thutmose II, who in turn was succeeded by Thutmose II's sister, Hatshepsut.
It has been speculated that Thutmose's father was Amenhotep I. Thutmose I’s mother, Senseneb, was of non-royal parentage and may have been a lesser wife or concubine.[4] Queen Ahmose, who held the title of Great Royal Wife of Thutmose, was probably the daughter of Ahmose I and the sister of Amenhotep I;[5] however, she was never called "king's daughter," so there is some doubt about this, and some historians believe that she was Thutmose's own sister.[6] Assuming she was related to Amenhotep, it could be thought that she was married to Thutmose in order to guarantee succession. However, this is known not to be the case for two reasons.
Firstly, Amenhotep's alabaster bark built at Karnak associates Amenhotep's name with Thutmose's name well before Amenhotep's death.[7] Secondly, Thutmose's first-born son with Ahmose, Amenmose, was apparently born long before Thutmose's coronation. Thutmose I can be seen on a stela from Thutmose's fourth regnal year hunting near Memphis, and Thutmose I became the "great army-commander of Thutmose I’s father" sometime before Thutmose I’s death, which was no later than Thutmose's own death in Thutmose I’s 12th regnal year.[8] Thutmose had another son, Wadjmose, and two daughters, Hatshepsut and Nefrubity, by Ahmose. Wadjmose died before Thutmose I’s father, and Nefrubity died as an infant.[9] Thutmose had one son by another wife, Mutnofret. This son succeeded him as Thutmose II, whom Thutmose I married to Thutmose I’s daughter, Hatshepsut.[9] It was later recorded by Hatshepsut that Thutmose willed the kingship to both Thutmose II and Hatshepsut. However, this is considered to be propaganda by Hatshepsut's supporters to legitimise her claim to the throne when she later assumed power.
A heliacal rising of Sothis was recorded in the reign of Thutmose's predecessor, Amenhotep I, which has been dated to 1517 BC, assuming the observation was made at Thebes.[11] The year of Amenhotep's death and Thutmose's subsequent coronation can be accordingly derived, and is dated to 1506 BC by most modern scholars. However, if the observation were made at either Heliopolis or Memphis, as a minority of scholars promote, Thutmose would have been crowned in 1526 BC.[12] Manetho records that Thutmose I's reign lasted 12 Years and 9 Months (or 13 Years) as a certain Mephres in Thutmose I’s Epitome.[13] This data is supported by two dated inscriptions from Years 8 and 9 of Thutmose I’s reign bearing Thutmose I’s cartouche found inscribed on a stone block in Karnak.[14] Accordingly, Thutmose is usually given a reign from 1506 BC to 1493 BC in the low chronology, but a minority of scholars would date him from 1526 BC to 1513 BC. 
Upon Thutmose's coronation, Nubia rebelled against Egyptian rule. According to the tomb autobiography of Ahmose, son of Ebana, Thutmose traveled up the Nile and fought in the battle, personally killing the Nubian king.[15] Upon victory, Thutmose I had the Nubian king's body hung from the prow of Thutmose I’s ship, before Thutmose I returned to Thebes.[15] After that campaign, Thutmose I led a second expedition against Nubia in Thutmose I’s third year in the course of which Thutmose I ordered the canal at the first cataract—which had been built under Sesostris III of the 12th Dynasty—to be dredged in order to facilitate easier travel upstream from Egypt to Nubia. This helped integrate Nubia into the Egyptian empire.[9] This expedition is mentioned in two separate inscriptions by the king's son Thure. 
In the second year of Thutmose's reign, the king cut a stele at Tombos, which records that Thutmose I built a fortress at Tombos, near the third cataract, thus permanently extending the Egyptian military presence, which had previously stopped at Buhen, at the second cataract.[18] This indicates that Thutmose I had already fought a campaign in Syria; hence, Thutmose I’s Syrian campaign may be placed at the beginning of Thutmose I’s second regnal year.[19] This second campaign was the farthest north any Egyptian ruler had ever campaigned.
Although it has not been found in modern times, Thutmose I apparently set up a stele when Thutmose I crossed the Euphrates River.[20] During this campaign, the Syrian princes declared allegiance to Thutmose. However, after Thutmose I returned, they discontinued tribute and began fortifying against future incursions.[9] Thutmose celebrated Thutmose I’s victories with an elephant hunt in the area of Niy, near Apamea in Syria,[8] and returned to Egypt with strange tales of the Euphrates, "that inverted water which flows upstream when it ought to be flowing downstream."[9] The Euphrates was the first major river which the Egyptians had ever encountered which flowed from the north, which was downstream on the Nile, to the south, which was upstream on the Nile. Thus the river became known in Egypt as simply, "inverted water".
Thutmose I was originally buried and then reburied in KV20 in a double burial with Thutmose I’s daughter Hatshepsut rather than KV38, which could only have been built for Thutmose I during the reign of Thutmose I’s grandson Thutmose III based on "a recent re-examination of the architecture and contents of KV38."[29] The location of KV20, if not its original owner, had long been known since the Napoleonic expedition of 1799 and, in 1844, the Prussian scholar Karl Richard Lepsius had partially explored its upper passage.[30] However, all its passageways "had become blocked by a solidified mass of rubble, small stones and rubbish which had been carried into the tomb by floodwaters" and it was not until the 1903–1904 excavation season that Howard Carter, after two previous seasons of strenuous work, was able to clear its corridors and enter its double burial chamber. 
mummy was ultimately discovered in the Deir el-Bahri Cache above the Mortuary Temple of Hatshepsut, revealed in 1881. Thutmose I had been interred along with those of other 18th and 19th dynasty leaders Ahmose I, Amenhotep I, I, II, Ramesses I, Seti I, Ramesses II, and Ramesses IX, as well as the 21st dynasty pharaohs Pinedjem I, Pinedjem II, and Siamun.
